---
coding: utf-8

title: "Internet Relay Chat: Client-to-Client Protocol (CTCP)"
abbrev: IRC Client-to-Client Protocol
docname: draft-oakley-irc-ctcp-latest

submissionType: independent
category: info

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs, comments]

updates: 1459, 2812

author:
  -
    #ins: M. Mikulėnas
    #name: Mantas Mikulėnas
    ins: M. Mikulenas
    name: Mantas Mikulenas
    org: Independent
    email: grawity@gmail.com
  -
    ins: D. Oakley
    name: Daniel Oakley
    org: ircdocs
    email: daniel@danieloaks.net

--- abstract

This document describes the Client-to-Client Protocol (CTCP), which lets Internet Relay Chat (IRC) clients send each other messages that get displayed or responded to in special ways. CTCP has been widely implemented, with most clients supporting it natively. This document outlines how to implement CTCP and the most common messages used.

--- middle

# Introduction

The core Internet Relay Chat (IRC) protocol as described in {{!RFC1459}} and {{!RFC2812}} only has a single command for regular user messages, and does not provide a way for clients to exchange information directly. Client-to-Client Protocol (CTCP) messages let clients exchange messages that get displayed or responded to in special ways. Some examples of how CTCP is used is to request special formatting on messages, query other clients for metadata, and help initiate file transfers with other clients.

This document goes over the subset of CTCP which is commonly implemented, and is compatible with clients implementing CTCP as described by older documents.

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in {{!RFC2119}}.


# Message Syntax

The PRIVMSG and NOTICE messages are used to transmit CTCP frames. To create a CTCP message, you simply replace the body (i.e. the text to be sent) of a PRIVMSG / NOTICE with the following:

~~~abnf
  delim   = %x01

  command = 1*( %x02-09 / %x0B-0C / %x0E-1F / %x21-FF )
                ; any octet except NUL, delim, CR, LF, and " "

  params  = 1*( %x02-09 / %x0B-0C / %x0E-FF )
                ; any octet except NUL, delim, CR, and LF

  body    = delim command [ SPACE params ] [ delim ]
~~~
{: artwork-align="center" artwork-name="syntax"}

Commands are case-insensitive. When creating new CTCP commands, authors SHOULD use only alphanumeric characters for ease of implementation.

The final `delim` SHOULD be sent on outgoing messages for compatibility reasons, and software MUST accept incoming messages which lack it. This is due to how certain clients implement message splitting and truncation.

CTCP queries are sent with the PRIVMSG IRC command, and CTCP replies are sent with NOTICE command.

Queries MAY be sent to channels. When these queries are responded to, the responses are sent to the querying client rather than the channel which the query was originally sent to.

Here are two examples of CTCP queries and replies:

~~~
  :alice PRIVMSG bob :\x01VERSION\x01
  :bob NOTICE alice :\x01VERSION Snak for Macintosh 4.13 English\x01

  :alice PRIVMSG #ircv3 :\x01PING 1473523796 918320\x01
  :bob NOTICE alice :\x01PING 1473523796 918320\x01
~~~


# Message Types

CTCP messages generally take on one of these types. These message types are defined here to simplify understanding, and aren’t differentiated by the protocol itself.


## Extended formatting

This type of CTCP is used to request special formatting of a user-visible message. That is, to send a user-visible message that should be displayed differently from regular messages - e.g. as an action, a whisper, an announcement.

Extended formatting messages are sent as a PRIVMSG, and are expected to be used in channels as well as between clients. There is no automatic response to this message type, as it is not a query nor reply.

These messages are sent as a PRIVMSG and can have parameters, but generate no reply.

Example:

~~~
  :dan PRIVMSG #ircv3 :\x01ACTION writes some specs!\x01
~~~


## Metadata Query

This type of CTCP is used to provide static information about the target client, user or connection.

This CTCP takes the form of a query and a response (as a PRIVMSG and NOTICE, respectively). Due to how bouncers interact with multiple clients, there may sometimes be multiple responses to queries.

Metadata queries MUST NOT require the recipient to implement any side effects (beyond sending the reply itself); if a CTCP message causes side effects by design, it should be categorized as an extended query instead.

Metadata queries do not have any parameters, but expect a reply with parameters as the response data.

Example:

~~~
  :alice PRIVMSG bob :\x01VERSION\x01
  :bob NOTICE alice :\x01VERSION SaberChat 27.5\x01
~~~


## Extended Query

This type of CTCP is used to provide dynamic information or invoke actions from the client.

This CTCP takes the form of a query and a response (as a PRIVMSG and NOTICE, respectively).

Queries sent to a channel always generate private replies.

Extended queries and replies may have parameters.

Example:

~~~
  :alice PRIVMSG bob :\x01PING 1473523796 918320\x01
  :bob NOTICE alice :\x01PING 1473523796 918320\x01
~~~


# Messages

CTCP messages themselves are not standardised. Clients that receive either unexpected messages or known messages with unexpected values SHOULD ignore them and produce no response to the sending user. Clients MAY receive more than one response per user for a query they send, due to multiple clients being connected behind an IRC bouncer.


# Acknowledgements

Thanks to the IRCv3 group for giving feedback on this specification, and to Khaled for advice on client flood protection.

Thanks to Michael Sandrof for creating CTCP, Troy Rollo for creating the related DCC protocol, as well as Klaus Zeuge and Ben Mesander who wrote and revised related specifications.

Special thanks to dequis, Peter Powell and James Wheare for help with this and related work.


# Security Considerations

CTCP messages are completely untrusted data, and clients MUST NOT assume that they are well-formed or complete.

Older CTCP specifications describe quoting which is complex and not widely implemented. Implementations SHOULD NOT implement low-level quoting or CTCP-level quoting when parsing messages.

Older CTCP specifications describe including more than one CTCP message inside a single PRIVMSG or NOTICE command. Implementations SHOULD NOT implement this form of CTCP parsing as it is not widely-implemented and may result in an implementation that can be attacked or spammed more easily.

CTCP requests can be abused to flood clients off a server. Clients may ignore or throttle excessive incoming requests to protect against this.

Many servers implement optional filtering to prevent any CTCP messages apart from ACTION from being sent to channels. When this is done, it can typically be enabled or disabled by channel operators with a channel mode.


--- back


# Message List

This section is not exhaustive, and only lists those CTCP messages which are widely implemented across the IRC ecosystem.

The reply and parameter lines below use a simplified syntax that represents variables by surrounding them with angle brackets, and represents repeating segments by surrounding them with curly brackets.


## ACTION

~~~
Type:    Extended Formatting
Params:  ACTION <text>
~~~

This extended formatting message shows that \<text\> should be displayed as a third-person action or emote; in clients, it’s generally activated with the command `/me`.

ACTION is universally implemented and very commonly used. Clients MUST implement this CTCP message to effectively use IRC.

Example:

~~~
  Raw:        :dan!user@host PRIVMSG #ircv3 :\x01ACTION does it!\x01

  Formatted:  * dan does it!
~~~


## CLIENTINFO

~~~
Type:   Metadata Query
Reply:  CLIENTINFO <token>{ <token>}
~~~

This metadata query returns a list of the CTCP messages that this client supports and implements, delimited by a single ASCII space.

CLIENTINFO is widely implemented. Clients SHOULD implement this CTCP message.

Example:

~~~
  Query:     CLIENTINFO
  Response:  CLIENTINFO ACTION DCC CLIENTINFO PING TIME VERSION
~~~


## DCC

~~~
Type:    Extended Query
Params:  DCC <type> <argument> <host> <port>
~~~

DCC (the Direct Client-to-Client protocol) is used to setup and control connections that go directly between clients, bypassing the IRC server. This is typically used for features that require a large amount of traffic between clients or simply wish to bypass the server itself such as file transfer and direct chat.

DCC requires its own specification, and is not described in-depth here.

DCC is widely implemented. Clients MAY implement this CTCP message.


## FINGER

~~~
Type:   Metadata Query
Reply:  FINGER <info>
~~~

This metadata query returns miscellaneous info about the user, typically the same information that’s held in their realname field.

However, some implementations return the client name and version instead.

FINGER is largely obsolete. Clients MAY implement this CTCP message.

Example:

~~~
  Query:     FINGER
  Response:  FINGER WeeChat 1.8-dev
~~~


## PING

~~~
Type:    Extended Query
Params:  PING <info>
~~~

This extended query is used to confirm reachability with other clients and to check latency. When receiving a CTCP PING, the reply MUST contain exactly the same parameters as the original query.

PING is universally implemented. Clients SHOULD implement this CTCP message.

Example:

~~~
  Query:     PING 1473523721 662865
  Response:  PING 1473523721 662865
  
  Query:     PING foo bar baz
  Response:  PING foo bar baz
~~~


## SOURCE

~~~
Type:   Metadata Query
Reply:  SOURCE <info>
~~~

This metadata query is used to return the location of the source code for the client.

SOURCE is rarely implemented. Clients MAY implement this CTCP message.

Example:

~~~
  Query:     SOURCE
  Response:  SOURCE https://weechat.org/download
~~~


## TIME

~~~
Type:    Extended Query
Params:  TIME <timestring>
~~~

This extended query is used to return the client’s local time in an unspecified human-readable format. In practice, both the format output by ctime() and the format described in Section 3.3 of {{!RFC5322}} are common.

New implementations MAY default to UTC time for privacy reasons.

TIME is almost universally implemented. Clients SHOULD implement this CTCP message.

Example:

~~~
  Query:     TIME
  Response:  TIME Mon, 08 May 2017 09:15:29 GMT
~~~


## VERSION

~~~
Type:   Metadata Query
Reply:  VERSION <verstring>
~~~

This metadata query is used to return the name and version of the client software in use. There is no specified format for the version string.

Clients may allow users to customise the response value for this query.

VERSION is universally implemented. Clients SHOULD implement this CTCP message.

Example:

~~~
  Query:     VERSION
  Response:  VERSION WeeChat 1.8-dev (git: v1.7-329-g22f2fd03a)
~~~


## USERINFO

~~~
Type:   Metadata Query
Reply:  USERINFO <info>
~~~

This metadata query returns miscellaneous info about the user, typically the same information that’s held in their realname field.

However, some implementations return `<nickname> (<realname>)` instead.

USERINFO is largely obsolete. Clients MAY implement this CTCP message.

Example:

~~~
  Query:     USERINFO
  Response:  USERINFO fred (Fred Foobar)
~~~
